Hybrid Search Revamped article (#1041)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/hybrid-search-revamped.md

---
title: "Hybrid Search Revamped"
short_description: "Merging different search methods to improve the search quality was never easier"
description: "Qdrant 1.10 introduces a new Query API to build a search system that combines different search methods to improve the search quality."
preview_dir: /articles_data/hybrid-search-revamped/preview
social_preview_image: /articles_data/hybrid-search-revamped/social-preview.png
weight: -150
author: Kacper Łukawski
author_link: https://kacperlukawski.com
date: 2024-07-21T14:24:00.000Z
---

> It's been more than a year since we published the [original article](/articles/hybrid-search) about building a hybrid 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's been over a year since we published the [original article](/articles/hybrid-search/) 
```

search system with Qdrant. The idea was straightforward: combine the results from different search methods to improve 

> the search quality. Back in 2023, you were still expected to use an additional service to bring the lexical search 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retrieval quality. Back in 2023, you still needed to use an additional service to bring lexical search 
```

> capabilities and combine all the intermediate results. Things have changed since then. Once we introduced the support of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capabilities and combine all the intermediate results. Things have changed since then. Once we introduced support for
```

> the sparse vectors, [the additional search service became obsolete](/articles/sparse-vectors/), but you were still 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sparse vectors, [the additional search service became obsolete](/articles/sparse-vectors/), but you were still 
```

> required to combine the results from different methods on your side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required to combine the results from different methods on your end.
```

> **Qdrant 1.10 introduces a new Query API that allows you to build a search system that combines different search methods 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Qdrant 1.10 introduces a new Query API that lets you build a search system by combining different search methods 
```

> to improve search quality**. Everything is now done on the server side, and you can focus on building the best search 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to improve retrieval quality**. Everything is now done on the server side, and you can focus on building the best search 
```

experience for your users. In this article, we will show you how to utilize the new [Query 
API](/documentation/concepts/search/#query-api) to build a hybrid search system.

## Introduction to the new Query API

> At Qdrant, we believe that vector search capabilities go well beyond the simple search for the nearest neighbors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Qdrant, we believe that vector search capabilities go well beyond a simple search for nearest neighbors.
```

That's why we provided separate methods for different search use cases, such as `search`, `recommend`, or `discover`.
With the latest release, we are happy to introduce the new Query API, which combines all of these methods into a single 
endpoint and also supports creating nested multistage queries that can be used to build complex search pipelines.

> If you are an existing Qdrant user, you probably have a running search mechanism that you want to improve, either sparse 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are an existing Qdrant user, you probably have a running search mechanism that you want to improve, whether sparse 
```

> or dense. Your system will act as a baseline for further experiments, so you have a reference point to compare the new

Reviewer: This is kind of unclear.

Author: Changed to "If you are an existing Qdrant user, you probably have a running search mechanism that you want to improve, whether sparse or dense. Doing any changes should be preceded by a proper evaluation of its effectiveness. " and moved the evaluation paragraph just below this sentence. The idea was to make the need for evaluation more prominent.

search methods with.

### Available embedding options

> Support of the multiple vectors per point is nothing new in Qdrant, but introducing the Query API makes it even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for multiple vectors per point is nothing new in Qdrant, but introducing the Query API makes it even
```

more powerful. The 1.10 release brings support for the multivectors, which allows you to treat lists of embeddings 
as a single entity. There are many possible ways of utilizing this feature, and the most prominent one is the support
for late interaction models, such as ColBERT. Instead of having a single embedding for each document or query, this
family of models creates a separate one for each token of text. In the search process, the final score is calculated 
based on the interaction between the tokens of the query and the document. Contrary to cross-encoders, document
embedding might be precomputed and stored in the database, which makes the search process much faster. If you are
curious about the details, please check out [the article about ColBERT, written by our friends from Jina 
AI](https://jina.ai/news/what-is-colbert-and-late-interaction-and-why-they-matter-in-search/).

![Late interaction](/articles_data/hybrid-search-revamped/late-interaction.png)

> Except for the multivectors, you can of course use the standard dense and sparse vectors, play with data types to reduce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides multivectors, you can use regular dense and sparse vectors, and experiment with smaller data types to reduce
```

> the use of memory. Named vectors help you to store different dimensionality of the embeddings, which is useful if you 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the use of memory. Named vectors can help you store different dimensionality's of the embeddings, which is useful if you 
```

some additional processing using the content of the documents, not just the scores. This processing may rely on an 
additional neural model, such as a cross-encoder which would be inefficient enough to be used on the whole dataset. 
These methods are practically applicable only when used on a smaller subset of candidates returned by the faster search 
methods. Late interaction models, such as ColBERT, are way more efficient in this case, as they can be used to rerank
the candidates without the need to access all the documents in the collection.

![Reranking](/articles_data/hybrid-search-revamped/reranking.png)

Ultimately, **any search mechanism might also be a reranking mechanism**. You can prefetch results with sparse vectors 
and then rerank them with the dense ones, or the other way around. Or, if you have Matryoshka embeddings, you can start 
with oversampling the candidates with the dense vectors of the lowest dimensionality and then gradually reduce the 
number of candidates by reranking them with the higher-dimensional embeddings. Actually, nothing stops you from 
combining both fusion and reranking. 

> Assume we would like to go really sophisticated and build a hybrid search mechanism that combines the results from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's go a step further and build a hybrid search mechanism that combines the results from the 
```

Matryoshka embeddings, dense vectors, and sparse vectors and then reranks them with the late interaction model. In the 

> meantime, some additional reranking and fusion steps will also be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meantime, we will introduce additional reranking and fusion steps.
```

            ),
        )
    ],
    # Finally rerank the results with the late interaction model. It only 
    # considers the documents retrieved by all the prefetch operations above. 
    # Return 10 final results.
    query=[
        [1.928, -0.654, ..., 0.213],
        [-1.197, 0.583, ..., 1.901],
        ...,
        [0.112, -1.473, ..., 1.786],
    ],
    using="late-interaction",
    with_payload=False,
    limit=10,
)
```

The options are endless, new Query API gives you the flexibility to experiment with different setups. Obviously, **you
rarely need to build such a complex search pipeline**, but it's good to know that you can do that if needed.

## Conclusion

The new Query API introduced in Qdrant 1.10 is a game-changer for building hybrid search systems. You don't need any
additional services to combine the results from different search methods, and you can even create more complex pipelines
and serve them directly from Qdrant. 

Our webinar on *Building the Ultimate Hybrid Search* takes you through the process of building a hybrid search system 
with Qdrant Query API. If you missed it, you can [watch the recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAZOxqzceEU), or 

> [check the notebooks](https://github.com/qdrant/workshop-ultimate-hybrid-search), if you prefer it that way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[check the notebooks](https://github.com/qdrant/workshop-ultimate-hybrid-search).
```
